export const meta = {
  title: "Should Developers Build Their Own Blog?",
  preview: "To build or not to build, that is the question",
  created: "2020-11-11T00:00:00.000",
  status: "published",
  reading_time: 6,
};

# Should Developers Build Their Own Blog?

Hello world, this is my first post in a series about starting a blog. If you
have any feedback, don't be hesitated to [reach out](/about) and let me know
what you think!

## Why start a blog?

Developers can use blog as a platform to organise personal thoughts, share their
knowledge, learn from feedbacks and connect with a wider network. It's an
iterative feedback loop where the writer can learn something new with each post
they write, identify areas of improvement and over time, develop their own field
of expertise.

> The best way to learn is to <s>teach</s>, write a blog

Developers can also benefit from the "soft skills" they gain from a writing
habit: the ability to communicate effectively, the persistence and the
initiative to demonstrate. As most developers work in a cross-functional team (a
team mix of engineers, designers, product...), having the ability to communicate
and share knowledge effectively will not only increase productivities for
themselves but the entire team. More than often, teams that suffer the most are
the ones that are _not communicating enough_, especially at a time of remote
working.

## Ways to blog

But to start a blog, we don't have to build it from scratch. Many great blogging
platforms offer you a professional look and a great writing experience straight
out of the box, alongside other perks such as performance and an immediate
presence in front of a massive userbase. Identify and picking the right set of
blogging features to start with could be a great help in ensuring that we have a
lasting and enjoyable blogging experience.

Below is a list of features that I could think of and would like to prioritise,
and they can roughly be categorised as about the **_content_** or else:

About the content:

- an editor that supports markup (e.g Markdown)
- instant preview of what the readers will see
- ability to add code snippets with correct highlights
- support for rich media types (images, videos, gifs, music...)

Else:

- ability for custom design (typography, colours, layout, dark mode...)
- advanced features like tags, search, comments
- enable discoveries by RSS, newsletters, i18n, SEO
- analytics, performance, caching and low maintenance efforts

And here are summaries of the few existing platforms I've looked at if I were to
use them to build my blog

**WordPress**

WordPress is an open-source content management system (CMS) that claims to host
38% of the internet today. You can install it on your server or pay a minimal
fee and use the hosted version. With a matured platform like WordPress, you can
start blogging today and know that you can extend the functionalities later with
WordPress' extensive ecosystem.

However, WordPress's unique ecosystem also has its downside. If you want to
adjust the site to be as flexible as you want, you either have to rely on
plugins (which could be bloated or have to pay to use) or dig into its
documentation and spend a significant time to learn about how WordPress itself
works.

**Medium**

Medium is a well-known platform for bloggers, and requires no self-hosting or
worry about security/updates. People often choose Medium for its zero
maintenance efforts and massive userbase
([60 million monthly active users](https://www.businessinsider.com/inside-the-meltdown-of-evan-williams-startup-medium-2017-2)).

Although Medium has a great reach, the platform often suggests the writers to
pay to promote their content to potential readers (like a social media
platform), and the site visitors are often limited/asked to subscribe first
before they read the contents. This business model left Medium with a bad
reputation in the community as the "Great Paywall" platform and it's often
considered a [lesser](https://github.com/mathieudutour/medium-to-own-blog)
[ideal](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=24942037) platform for developer
resources.

**Ghost**

Ghost is similar to WordPress, as in you can install it locally or use pay to
use its hosted version. It's feature-rich and unlike WordPress (a CMS you can
extend into any type of website), Ghost is designed for specifically for
bloggers. It provides useful features such as low maintenance, newsletters, SEO
and third-party integrations. And unlike Medium, it doesn't have a "paywall"
reputation (although it does offer a membership feature that can be enabled by
the site owner).

Like WordPress, Ghost is also developer-friendly. As seen on their website:
_"The entire platform can be modified and customised to suit your needs. It's
very powerful but does require some knowledge of code. Ghost is not necessarily
a good platform for beginners or people who just want a simple personal blog"_.
During my first impression with Ghost, I found myself dissatisfied with the
limitation of the provided themes and had to edit the theme's source code (in
the Handlebars templating language). The hosted version of Ghost is also
relatively high (currently at \$36/month), it is the most expensive hosted
option I've looked into.

**Notion**

Technically Notion is a note-taking software for personal and teams, but it
offers the best overall writing UX experience I had to consider it as a blogging
alternative.

To use Notion as a blog, you just have to publish your pages publicly and then
it can be accessed as a Notion site on the internet. But Notion is still a
proprietary software and the customisations are limited. Currently, there are
services like [super.so](https://super.so/) who can enhance your Notion
experience with custom domains and typography but hopefully, we (the users) can
have more freedom with the software when Notion
[improves its API](https://www.notion.so/Does-Notion-have-an-API-I-can-use-4541b07a5caa46dba0026624646118c0).

**Developer forums**

My last considerations are developer forums/websites like CSS Tricks, Smashing
Magazine, Digital Ocean Community, Hacker Noon, hashnode.com, Dev.to...

These are great choices if you want to reach out to a wide audience like Medium,
they are helpful on building an online presence and you could share tutorials or
quick guides and help developers like you out. Some of these platforms (like CSS
Tricks or Smashing Magazine) will require an approval system where you submit
your content first before you post on theirs, so for absolute beginners who are
just starting to blog, they should have a blog and presence elsewhere first.

## Build a blog

If you were to build your own blog, static website generators are becoming the
de facto technology to use. You can serve pages and assets as pre-generated
files, which allows for features such as cache over CDN, security and fast
loading performance. As I am a JavaScript/React developer, I will briefly talk
about the two popular React framework people use to build a performant static
blog today.

**Gatsby**

Gatsby is a React framework famous for its focus on excellent static site
generation (SSG), built-in best practices, GraphQL and rich ecosystem of
plugins. Developers can pick a starter template and instantly deploy
feature-rich websites that load in milliseconds on modern hosting platforms like
Netlify.

**Next.js**

Next was introduced to the React ecosystem as a server-side rendering (SSR)
framework (contrary to the single-page applications (SPA) use of React). From
version 9.3, Next introduced support for SSG, making it a top competitor against
Gatsby and allowing developers to pick a hybrid strategy (SSR/SSG) that fits
their use cases on a per-page basis.

Both Gatsby and Next are popular among developers because they are frameworks
that offer more than React does. A framework can save you time from managing
toolings such as bundlers, routing to enabling best practices like performances,
image optimisation and caching out of the box. But no matter which technology we
choose, there are up and downs we need to consider when building a blog from
scratch.

**Advantages of building a blog**

As a web developer, the biggest advantage of building a blog from scratch is
that you have the skillsets to **build the exact website** you want. Everything
can be customised from the design to features to the numbers of bytes to send to
the users.

It will be a learning experience too, as every feature you wish to implement
(whether design or performance-related) will require thoughts, planning and
actions by you. You may have to learn the basics again like how does Markdown
actually translate to HTML or advanced features like implementing tags/search.
But a blog can be shown as a side-project that demonstrates you technical
abilities, alongside the content that you write.

**Drawbacks of building a blog**

The biggest drawback of building a blog will be **time**.

It will take time to build the site and it will take time to maintain. For
beginners, it is recommended to keep it simple, focus on the content first and
only develop features that are necessary to the reading experience. But if you
add add more features, every feature will have its own time to research, plan,
execute and maintain.

Also, be prepared to update/revisit the code. Libraries will be updated with new
features, dependencies will go out of date, vulnerabilities will be found,
third-party integrations will change and you will take time away from the
writing to fix the code again.

Lastly, many people give up early on their blog due to the lack of feedbacks and
visits, so if you want a successful blog, besides building the platform, write
the content, you will also have to put efforts in attracting readers. This could
be more difficult when compared to Medium or developer forums, as you will most
likely have to spend time to do self-marketing through different channels like
social media or [post once, syndicate elsewhere](https://indieweb.org/POSSE).

## Summary

Are you a developer who wants to focus on the **content** and publish often?

If so, **no**. Use an existing platform or at least a starter template.

Are you a developer who wants to **learn a lot** and have the time?

If so, **yes**. Good luck and have fun!
